We said that for R verbs we take away the R and we put abba to get this line in the past
So senar to dine or to have dinner, senaba, I was having dinner, I was dining, I used to have dinner, I used to dine
Now for er-ir verbs we take away our er-ir ending and we put ia.
Where did we hear that before?
I
The wood tense.
Comer was to eat.
How was I wood eat?
Comeria.
Good.
Now for the line in the past
We're not adding on to the full verb.
We're taking off our ending before we put IA.
So how would it be I was eating, he was eating, she was eating, etc.
Comia.
Vender is a to sell vendor.
I would sell it.
Lo venderia.
Lovenderia.
I was selling it.
Lovendia.
Good.
If you want to say for sale, you can just say it sells itself.
It sells itself.
It's for sale.
How would that be?
Se vende.
Good.
For sale.
Se vende.
It sells itself.
And if you go to a Spanish speaking place, you will see on houses and on cars this expression.
Se vende.
It was selling itself, it was for sale.
Seven dia.
It would be for sale.
It would sell itself
Sevenaria.
Sevenderia.
It would sell itself, it would be for sale.
Good.
What was to break again related to rupture?
Romper.
Good.
How would you say I was breaking it?
Lo rompia.
Good.
And if you just want to say it was breaking, and you mean by itself, it was breaking, not something else.
How would you say it?
Se rompia.
Good.
How would you say they were breaking?
Serompian.
Se rompian.
Good.
Give me again the two form.
Two break.
Romper.
What is I would break it?
I would break it
Lo rompía.
Ah.
Lo romperia.
I would break it.
How would you say I was breaking it?
Lo Rompia.
Good.
How would you say they would break it?
They would break it
Less?
They would break is where you need to begin.
Romperian.
Lo romperian.
They were breaking it.
Lo Rompian.
So we have the same endings for wood and for the line in the past for er-ear verbs.
The big difference of course is that for wood we are adding on to the two form of the verb and for the past we're taking off our endings first.
Which means we get pairs like comeria, I would eat, comia, I was eating.
Romperia I would break, rhompia I was breaking.
So how would you say it breaks?
It breaks and you mean it gets broken, it breaks itself in the present tense.
Se rompe.
How would you say it's going to break?
It's going to break.
How is we are going or let's go?
Ah, vamos.
It is going to break
Se va a romper.
Good.
Se va-a romper o ba romper se.
So this means it's going to break.
It's going to get broken and there we're not waiting to hear what it's going to break because we have se so we completed that structure, we completed the sentence with se
The word for how in Spanish is como.
If you want to ask somebody in Spanish how do you say
So maybe you have a Spanish-speaking friend that speaks English and you want to use them like a dictionary and say how do you say X, Y, or Z?
What you will say in Spanish is how does it say itself?
How is it said?
How does it say itself?
So this is another example of where you might be using this structure of self, which we are seeing in Spanish is very flexible.
It's giving us many different meanings, this structure of myself, yourself, ourselves, itself, this structure.
So it says from desir is dise.
It's a little bit irregular, but then the other versions follow.
So we have this for he she it or stead.
How would you say you informal say
Disses.
Good, and they sen.
D and as we know the we form tends to escape the irregularity as the accent is somewhere else, so we go back to desir
And to say we say decimos.
Decimos.
Good.
So how would you say how is it said?
How does it say itself?
Como se dice.
So you you will use this often.
You don't say como dices.
This means how do you as an individual say?
How do you say it?
If you want to say how is it said, como se dice?
How does it say itself?
So se is doing quite a lot in Spanish.
Sometimes we're using it to wrap up the sentence to show that we're not using a verb to anybody or to anything else, like in it breaks or it transforms, these examples that we saw
Sometimes the se is changing the meaning like between kedar remain or be left over and kedar se to stay.
And sometimes this se has quite a creative application.
Se vende, it sells itself, for sale.
Or we could even have se habla.
Se habla español.
Spanish speaks itself.
Spanish is spoken.
Spanish spoken.
Se habla español.
Quedar by itself means to remain.
And you can use this in the sense of I have one left
In Spanish you will say it remains to me one.
This is the structure in Spanish.
I have one left.
It remains to me one.
So how would you say that?
I have one left.
What is the word for one?
Uno.
Uno or Una if you're talking about a feminine thing.
So I have one left.
It remains to me one.
Me quedo uno.
That means I stay one.
So there you made the reflexive structure.
You said I remain myself and you got the meaning of to stay.
But what you want is it remains to me.
Me queda uno.
I have one left.
I have two left.
If me keda uno is it remains to me one, I have one left.
How do you think you would say I have two left?
The word for two is dos
DOS DOS Related to Duo.
So I have two left.
They remain to me two
Me quedan dos.
Very good.
And of course we have the they form of the verb because it's they remain.
As I'm saying they remain prune, how do you think it would be if you wanted to say he has two left?
Le quedan dos.
Two of them.
They were named to him.
Le quedan dos
He has two left or she has two left or you formal have two left.
So maybe if you go to a shop and you ask for something and uh there's none left, maybe they will say no me quedan, I don't have any left
No me kedan, no me queda, you will hear both.
Just depending on what the person has in their mind.
I have none left as in one, I have none left as in bevugon.
No me keda, no me kedan.
But we saw that with this verb then when we use this reflexive structure, this self-structure, we get a different meaning.
If I say I remain myself, then I get the meaning of to stay.
I stay.
So how is I remain myself?
Mekedo.
Good.
We remain ourselves.
Nos kedamos.
Good.
He remains himself or she remains herself?
Se queda.
They stay?
Se quedan.
Good.
It's all of those that begin with elos las all become se for the self version.
From ablar to speak, if you want to say I was speaking, he was speaking.
Ablaba.
So we have abba as our key sound for the line in the past for our verbs.
They were speaking?
Good.
So how would you say they were staying?
They were remaining themselves.
Se kedavan.
Se kedavan?
Good.
They weren't staying here.
No sequedabanaki.
Good.
I wasn't staying here.
No me quedaba, no.
So Aba works for I, he, she, it.
No me quedaba aquí.
And we were staying here.
Nos kedabamos aquí.
The accent stays.
Nos kedavamos aquí.
We weren't staying here.
No nos quedábamos aquí.
Good.
Now, if you wanted to say we didn't have any left.
So here what we will say is it didn't or they didn't, we have the option, remain to us
No nos quedaba.
Good.
No nos quedaba o no nos quedaban.